# 11. e2e ci test scaling

Date: 2023-10-13

## Status

Accepted

Supercedes [10. e2e Testing Improvement](0010-e2e-testing-improvement.md)

## Context

Source issue: https://github.com/defenseunicorns/delivery-github-actions-workflows/issues/30

Our current implementation of reusable workflows and actions are too rigid to support the needs of various repositories. Right now our pipelines are hard coded to support multiple required status-checks and e2e tests that may not be relevant for caller repositories. For example, `test-complete-secure` or `test-complete-insecure` or `_test-on-prem-lite` may not make sense for every repo. Futhermore the current implementation doesn't scale well to add new tests or status checks for each test. These same scaling issues also exist for the pre-commit checks.

All of our pipeline logic already depends on makefile logic. We should leverage this to scale our pipelines to the needs of the caller repo.

## Decision

Have only 2 required status checks:
- pre-commit checks
- e2e-tests

e2e testing:
- By default, have pipeline read the caller repo's makefile to determine what tests to run
- A CI job will find make targets starting with `test-ci-` for e2e testing jobs. These tests will be ran in parallel when committing to main and also when creating a release.
- A CI job will find make targets starting with `test-release` for e2e testing jobs. These tests will be ran in parallel when creating a release specifically.
  - We will need to add a 'default' AWS region to each `test-ci-` make target. This will be used to determine which role github actions will assume to run the tests.
- For each target, add to an array building a matrix of e2e-tests passed into the e2e test workflow to run in parallel

pre-commit checks:
- A CI job will find make targets starting with `pre-commit-` for pre-commit jobs
- For each target, add to an array building a matrix of pre-commit jobs that will be passed into the pre-commit workflow to run in parallel
- After each matrix test runs, send status check of either success or failed based on return state of **all jobs** that were passed into the job matrix

Both `delivery-github-actions-workflows/.github/workflows/pr-merge-group-test.yml` (reusable workflow for merge queue testing pattern) and the caller repo's `test-command.yml` will utilize the same `e2e-test.yml` reusable workflow to build e2e job matrixes.

The patterns for the repos with a merge queue that utilize the `pr-merge-group-test` workflow will stay the same.
The `e2e-test.yml` and `pr-merge-group-test.yml` will be able to accept inputs to override the default job matrixes that are generated by CI.

### pr-merge-group-test.yml reusable workflow

#### inputs:

`common-e2e-test-matrix`:
- This matrix of jobs will be ran always before merging into main
- Defaults to all `test-ci-` targets in the makefile.
  - Intention: all `test-ci-` jobs should pass before merging into main
  - Is overridable if needed if some tests are not relevant for a repo/are redundant

`release-e2e-test-matrix`:
- This matrix of jobs will be ran before a release is cut
- Defaults to all `test-release-` and `test-ci-` targets in the makefile.
  - Intention: all `test-release-` and `test-ci-` targets should pass before creating a release
  - Is overridable if needed if some tests are not relevant for a release/are redundant

`e2e-required-status-check`:
- This status check will be reported when all jobs in the e2e-test matrix are complete
- Defaults to `e2e-tests`

```yaml
    # example inputs to override the default job matrixes, these would have precedence. You can run arbitrary make targets and regions
    inputs:
      common-ci-e2e-test-matrix:
        description: >
          make target and region to run e2e tests on, must be json formatted
          If not provided, upstream workflow will run all make targets in the caller repo's Makefile that start with 'test-ci-'
          These tests are ran when:
            - In the merge queue when merging into main
            - In the merge queue when merging into a release-please branch that would cut a release of the repo

          example input:
            [
              {
                "make-target": "test-ci-complete-common",
                "region": "us-east-2"
              }
            ]
        type: string
        required: false
      release-e2e-test-matrix:
        description: >
          make target and region to run e2e tests on, must be json formatted
          If not provided, upstream workflow will run all make targets in the caller repo's Makefile that start with 'test-release-' and 'test-ci-'
          These tests are ran when:
            - In the merge queue when merging into a release-please branch that would cut a release of the repo

          example input:
            [
              {
                "make-target": "test-ci-complete-common",
                "region": "us-east-2"
              },
              {
                "make-target": "test-release-complete-common",
                "region": "us-gov-west-1"
              },
              {
                "make-target": "test-release-complete-whatever",
                "region": "us-gov-east-1"
              }
            ]
        type: string
        required: false
      e2e-required-status-check:
        description: "status check to report when e2e tests are complete"
        type: string
        required: false
        default: '["e2e-tests"]'
```

essentially, caller repos can input both or none of these and it will work. They are overridable if needed to keep our pipelines DRY.

### e2e-test.yml reusable workflow
This workflow is used by the `pr-merge-group-test.yml` reusable workflow and the `/test` slash command dispatch workflow pattern.
#### inputs

`e2e-test-matrix`:
- This matrix of jobs has precedence over the default e2e test matrixes generated by the caller repo's makefile

`release-branch`:
- Defaults to false
- This boolean switch determines if CI is going to add the `test-release-` make targets to the e2e-test matrix

### pre-commit.yml reusable workflow

`pre-commit checks`:
- This matrix of jobs will still be ran in PRs, merging into main, and before a release is cut
- Reworked a to fetch the caller repo's makefile and find all make targets starting with `pre-commit-` (excluding `pre-commit-all`)

### slash command dispatch

`/test` changes:

From a PR comment, a user with write status to the repo can:

run a single test
`/test make=<make-target> region=<region>`

run ping test and print debug info to the pipeline logs
`/test ping`

run all tests in the makefile beginning with `test-ci-`
`/test`

## Consequences

- Pipelines will scale to the caller repos needs if these makefile patterns are followed.
- Logic is simplified in the pipelines.
- Repo management is simplifed in the form of required status-checks being standardized.
- Hard logic is dictated by the makefile. The pipeline will report status from the inputs fed to it by the caller workflows.
